Page 1 of 2  Visa D – WORK (more than 90 days) – OTHER THAN UNIQUE PERMIT  
 
Required documents:  
 
1. National passport into which a visa can be affixed and which is valid for more than 12  months  
 
2. Completed and signed national Belgian application form with 1 recent color photograph (5x3cm) with 
white background glued to the application form  Welcome to VFS Global | vfsglobal  
 
3. Copy of proof of payment of the contribution covering administrative costs.  
Redevance | IBZ  
 
4. The document to choose the language in which you would like to be informed about the decision in 
your visa application  Use of language in administrative matters (1).pdf  
 
5. Copy of the identity page of your  passport  
 
6. Copy + original of your working permit/professional  card  
 
a.) In case of working as an employee : original of work permit + 1 copy (the work -permit or exception of 
work -permit has to be applied by the future employer in Belgium with the Regional Ministry of 
Employment)  
 
b.) In case of working on a self -employed basis  : original of professional card + 1 copy  
 
7. Medical certificate from our panel doctor  (+1 copy) attesting that the applicant is not carrying 
any of the diseases which might endanger public health   Certificat médical | IBZ  
 
8. Certificate attesting to the lack of any convictions for crimes or offences under common law  (+1 
copy).  ( National Police clearance certificate from passport office + Apostille from MEA  )  
 
Remarks : 
 
1. The applicant has to submit his/her application by him/herself.  (All the documents issued by a 
government authority should be submitted in  original)  
 
2. Please make TWO copies (legible) of all documents mentioned above (front and back). Documents 
have to be arranged in the above order and are to be submitted in 2 separate  files.  
3. The applicant needs to do all legalizations of official documents before submitting the visa 
application.  
4. You should submit your application minimum 30 days before the foreseen travel  date.  
 
5. You can submit your application at the earliest three months before your planned  visit.  
 
6. Additional documents, even if not featured in the list above, may be required by the  Embassy.  Page 2 of 2  7. The administrative and visa fee is non -refundable if the visa is  denied.  
 
8. Please note that the city hall in Belgium might require your original legalized birth certificate upon 
your registration in  Belgium.  
9. A later change to the p urpose of the visit is not admissible. A prolongation of the visa is not possible. 
In both cases, a new application has to be  entered.  
 
10. More information about scheduling an appointment can be obtained from website of  
Welcome to VFS Global | vfsglobal  
 
11. For more detailed information on supporting documents, processing times, tracking the progress of 
your visa application, legal background and other immigration related topics, please refer to the website 
of the Immigration Office of Belgium:  Immigration Office | IBZ   
Division of Human Resources / Attendance and Leave                                        Return to Table of Contents                   Page  | 3                                                                                          
Form questions:  (813) 974 -2970  Rev. 11/2018  
HOURS OF WORK  
FAIR LABOR STANDARDS  ACT (FLSA) PROVISIO NS ON ATTENDANCE & L EAVE  
The FLSA gove rns, but is not limited to setting a minimum hourly wage, establishing a minimum age 
to work, identifying compensable hours, and defining overtime and overtime compensation. These 
apply to USF. There are a number of sites on the web that provide informatio n about the FLSA. Some 
of those are listed at the end of this section. This section of the USF Division of Human Resources  
(DHR)  procedures covers hours of work and pertains to  non-exempt Staff and Temporary employees. 
For non -exempt Staff employees, when  the total hours work ed exceed 40  in a workweek , those 
employees are eligible for compensation in the form of compensatory time or overtime pay. 
Temporary employees are not eligible for compensatory time but are eligible for overtime pay when 
their actual work hours exceed 40 in a workweek. At times, there are misunderstandings about what 
the FLSA does or does not require. As a summary, the FLSA does not 
require:  
 vacation, holiday, severance, or sick pay;  
 meal or rest periods, holidays off, or vacations;   
 premium pay for weekend or holiday work;  
 pay raises or fringe benefits; and  
 a discharge notice, reason for discharge, or immediate payment 
of final wages to terminated employees.  
 
When we think of work, we normally think of being engaged in some type of a ctivity that as an end 
result accomplishes something, completes a task, etc. The activity or principal activity referred to by 
the FLSA may be physical, mental and/or both. We often times think only of the activities involved 
with the execution of the spec ific duties and responsibilities and work hours that have been outlined 
on our job descriptions as work time. However, there are some activities that may be counted as 
compensable hours worked for non -exempt employees outside of the normal duties and 
respo nsibilities. Some of those situations and examples are:  
Breaks and Meal Period  - The FLSA does not require an employer to provide time for breaks and 
meal periods.  
 Breaks - It is important to remember that breaks are not mandatory. It is a privilege, not a 
right. At the university, non-exempt Staff and Temporary employees may be permitted one 15 
minute mid -morning break and one 15 minute mid -afternoon break. Breaks cannot be 
accumulated, cover for late arrival to work, extended lunch hours, or be used for early 
departure from work. The time spent on authorized breaks must be counted as hours worked. 
Any exceptions to the above must be approved through DHR .  
 Meal Periods  - Even though the FLSA does not require employers to provide meal periods, it 
does stipu late that if one does exist, at least 30 minutes or more constitute a bona fide meal 
period. Meal periods are not counted as work time. Normally, employees remove themselves 
from the work location and are therefore not performing any duties. However, when an 
employee remains at the work location and while eating performs any job -related duties, other 
than incidental ones (such as answering a question), the time must be counted as hours  
Division of Human Resources / Attendance and Leave                                        Return to Table of Contents                   Page  | 4                                                                                          
Form questions:  (813) 974 -2970  Rev. 11/2018  
worked. At USF, a supervisor may adjust an employee's work schedule to p revent an overtime 
situation when an employee works during a meal period.  
Suffered or Permitted Work Hours  - Although there are some standard times or peak periods 
when overtime might be required, normally the need to work overtime is for emergency situat ions 
only. Overtime must be requested and approved prior to working the additional hours.  
Work not requested but suffered or permitted is still 
considered hours worked. This may occur when an 
employee begins to work prior to the beginning of the 
assigned  shift, during the lunch hours, or continues to work 
at the end of the assigned shift without approval. When the 
supervisor has knowledge of or has reason to believe that 
the employee is working additional hours that have not been 
requested and approved, t he hours must be counted as 
hours worked.  
Travel - Official Travel during an employee's normal working hours, whether on regular workdays or 
regular days off, shall be counted as hours worked. Time spent traveling outside of the employee's 
normal working hours is not considered work time as defined by the FLSA. Please consult the USF 
Attendance and Leave Administrator in DHR  if there are any questions about which hours must be 
counted as work time during travel.  
Waiting to Work  - An employee who has been working required overtime (notification from the 
supervisor had been on a day -to-day basis) is in a compensable waiting period if at the end of their 
regular scheduled shift, he/she has not been notified if overtime is required for that day and he /she 
must  "wait" for that determination. Even though he /she is not performing any duties, he /she doesn't 
know if overtime will be required for that day and has not been released to go home. The waiting time 
is considered hours of work and those hours are compensabl e and reported as work hours on the 
time sheet for that day.  
Medical Attention  – Time spent by an employee  waiting for and receiving medical attention for a 
work -related injury or illness during the employee’s normal scheduled shift constitutes hours work ed. 
Therefore, such time is compensable as hours worked for overtime pu rposes.  
WORK HOURS  
Regular Hours of Operation  – the University’s regular hours of operation are 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 
p.m., Monday through Friday. Generally, university offices and units ar e to be sufficiently staffed to 
provide full services during the hours of operation, except when the university is closed. Because 
certain university services are available to client s outside the regular hours of operation, this schedule 
may vary depending  on the nature of the job and when services must be provided. For example, 
some offices are open earlier or later one or more days per week. Others may have assigned shifts or 
rotating shifts where the normal work schedule is other than 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p .m.  
Workweek - For full -time Staff and Temporary employees, 40 hours 
constitutes a workweek . Friday through Thursday is the workweek  and 
corresponds to our bi -weekly pay period schedule. Administration and 
Faculty are expected to work the hours necessary  to carry out assignments, 
and their work hours may exceed 40 in a workweek . Under certain  
Division of Human Resources / Attendance and Leave                                        Return to Table of Contents                   Page  | 5                                                                                          
Form questions:  (813) 974 -2970  Rev. 11/2018  conditions, a supervisor may approve a non -standard workweek .  
Temporary Hours  – Hourly Temporary employees receive payment for actual hours worked and 
are not eligi ble for any paid holidays. Salaried Temporary employees (adjunct, professional, post 
docs, phased retirees, and graduate assistants/associates) are paid a bi -weekly amount to complete 
a project or assignment and may be paid if so certified.  
Timesheets  - The University requires all non -exempt employees (with the exception of salaried 
temporary employees) to fill out a timesheet each day they work.  The FLSA requires that every 
covered employer keep records of hours worked for every  non-exempt worker.   The de partmental 
attendance and leave coordinator is responsible for maintaining, auditing and record retention of all 
timesheets.   Original copies must be kept on file until an audit has been completed.  
Total daily hours should be entered to the nearest ¼ hour,  round 7 minutes down, 8 minutes up.  
Flextime  - Flextime is a privilege. When requested by an employee, the supervisor may approve a 
daily work schedule that  differs from that generally used by the work unit. Approval may be on an 
incidental basis or a per manent basis and may be rescinded if the variation in work schedule is 
detrimental to the operation of the work unit or hinders the providing of services. The approval should 
be in writing and the position description updated in Careers@USF to reflect the revised hours of 
work. A supervisor may elect to rotate flextime privileges among staff.  
Other Situations that May Be Considered Work Hours:  
On-Call - Situations are generally not considered hours of work. However, when an employee is 
instructed to re main at the work site because he/she is on -call, those on -call hours are considered 
hours of work.  
Required Training  - The hours spent in "class time" for training, workshops, seminars, classes, or 
courses that the employer requires are considered work hours .  
Emergency Closing  - When the university is closed , all or in part , due to a natural disaster or an 
unplanned sudden emergency occurrence, only those employees who perform essential services and 
are required to work are permitted to work. This may includ e University Police or other employees 
designated as essential personnel for the purpose of the emergency. Vice Presidents, Deans, and 
Directors or their designees of a college, division or department will identify those personnel that are 
deemed essential  personnel. The time spent performing essential duties during an emergency closing 
are considered hours worked.  
Special compensatory leave is provided to Staff and non -exempt Administration  employees required 
to perform essential duties during an emergency  closing for the hours worked during the closing .  
Special compensatory leave is provided to Staff and non -exempt Administration  employees required 
to perform essential duties for hours worked outside of their normal work schedule to prepare for or 
respond  to a declared University emergency, as determined by the Chief Administrative Officer or 
designee . 
Employees already on a leave of absence, with or without pay, will not be allowed to have the leave 
of absence changed to administrative leave to cover the absence. Employees that are not required to  
Division of Human Resources / Attendance and Leave                                        Return to Table of Contents                   Page  | 6                                                                                          
Form questions:  (813) 974 -2970  Rev. 11/2018  
work during an emergency closing are granted administrative leave in an amount equal to their 
appointed FTE or in an amount necessary to bring them up to their normal hours for the workweek .  
Faculty, Administrat ion and Executive Service employees, if required to work, do not receive  special 
compensatory leave for any hours worked during the closing.  
When  an emergency closing occur s, updated information will be posted to the USF Home page to 
address specific info rmation relating to the current closing.  
 
Other Situations - There may be other activities  under the aforementioned  situations that may 
actually be considered as "work hours," and are therefore compensable. Some of the activities will 
have to be evaluated o n a case -by-case basis. Remember that in determining work hours, all aspects 
of the situation must be reviewed.  
NON -STANDARD WORKWEE K (STAFF EMPLOYEES O NLY)  
When it is in the best interest of the University, employee(s), or both, a Dean or Director may ap prove 
a request for a permanent non -standard workweek for one or more Staff employees. This approval 
authority may not be delegated lower than the dean/director level. A request for a non -standard 
workweek may be made by an employee, a group of employees, or a supervisor.  
The approval of a non -standard workweek should not disrupt the university's or the organizational 
unit's regular hours of operations or hinder the university's ability to carry out its mission or services.  
Requesting and Approving a Non -Standard Workweek for Staff Employees  
An employee, group of employees, or a supervisor may request a non -standard workweek by 
submitting a written request through appropriate management channels to the Dean or Director. In 
the request, include the followi ng information:  
 Employee's name, position number, and class title (or position number and class title, if 
position is vacant);  
 The schedule of the days and hours that constitute the workweek for the employee (this is 
nece ssary to determine overtime,  holid ay time and pay, when applicable);  
 When required by the Dean/Director:  
o justification for the request;  
o an explanation of how adequate coverage during normal hours of operation will be 
maintained; and  
o a description of the contingency plan to be implemented  in the event of unexpected 
absences.  
A copy of the approval will be kept in the employee's departmental attendance and leave file.  
OVERTIME, COMPENSATO RY LEAVE HOURS AND W ORK ON A HOLIDAY  
Compensation for Work During a Week with a Holiday  - When an 
employee is required to work on a holiday, he/she is eligible to earn 
special compensatory leave which must be requested in the same manner 
as other types of leave.   
Division of Human Resources / Attendance and Leave                                        Return to Table of Contents                   Page  | 7                                                                                          
Form questions:  (813) 974 -2970  Rev. 11/2018   Clinical Faculty employees at USF Health are not eligible to earn special compensatory leave 
(delayed holiday).  
 Administration employees are eligible to earn special compensatory leave for work on a 
holiday if approved by the appropriate VP/Dean or Director.  
 Salaried Tem porary employees are not hourly and  their biweekly rates of pay are not 
impac ted by paid holidays. Hourly Temporary employees do not earn, use or receive payment 
for compensatory time. Hourly Temporary employees are paid only for the number of hours 
they actually work.  
 Exempt and non -exempt Staff employees receive an equivalent num ber of hours of special 
compensatory leave, as specified below. Exempt and non -exempt Staff employees earn 
special compensatory leave for work when the following situations occur:  
When the Staff employee is required to work on the holiday, the following e quation 
applies: 32 h ours worked + 8 h ours worked on holiday + 8 hours  holiday not observed = 
48 hours.  
Compensation: 40 h ours straight time paid + 8 h ours special compensatory leave earned 
(delayed holiday)  
When the holiday falls on the Staff employee’s regular day off and the employee does not 
work, he/she  receives special compensatory leave equivalent to the daily number of hours 
that they normally work. When the actual hours of work during the workweek are 40 or 
less, but when added to holiday, the tot al weekly hours exceed 40, the following equation 
applies:  
35 hours worked + 8 h ours holiday observed = 43 h ours. 
Compensation: 40 h ours straight time paid + 3 h ours special compensatory leave earned  
Part-time employees are granted a prorated number of ho urs for a holiday based on their FTE (full -
time equivalency).  
Overtime Work  - Normally, full -time employees will be compensated for 80 hours each biweekly 
pay period (40 hours each workweek). If possible, supervisors are to prevent situations which requir e 
compensating  Staff employees for more than 40 hours by adjusting employees' work  schedules 
during the workweek.  
When the statutory responsibilities of the university cannot be accomplished unless overtime work is 
authorized, overtime work may be required . Overtime work is to be approved in advance by an 
employee's supervisor or other appropriate authority. However, such work is considered 
compensable for a non -exempt employee even if not authorized by the supervisor .  
Adjusting Work week and/or Leave Use t o Minimize Overtime or Additional Hours  – 
Staff Employees  – A Staff employee who works in excess of his/her normal number of hours for 
the workday or who works on his/her regular day off should, whenever possible, have another work  
day in the workweek redu ced so that he/she is compensated for only 40 hours for the workweek.  
The hours worked and leave used by an employee during a work week are to be adjusted by the 
supervisor so that compensation for hours in excess of 40 is not required, regardless of the type of  
Division of Human Resources / Attendance and Leave                                        Return to Table of Contents                   Page  | 8                                                                                          
Form questions:  (813) 974 -2970  Rev. 11/2018  
leave originally approved, including administrative leave, except for job -related disability leave, which 
must be compensated as hours worked for overtime purposes.  
When approving an employee ’s request for leave, the supervisor may approve the emp loyee ’s 
absence but should not approve a specific number of hours of leave to be used. Therefore, at the end 
of the workweek during which the absence occurs, the supervisor approves only the actual number of 
hours of leave needed to bring the employee ’s total number of hours of compensation up to 40, with 
additional hours of absence considered non -work hours.  
Compensation for Overtime Worked:  
 
 Exempt Staff Employees  
 Temporary Employees  
 Non-Exempt Employees  
Note: Administration, Faculty and Professional/ Salaried Temporary employees are not eligible to be 
compensated for extra hours worked. Under certain conditions, employees may be eligible for Extra 
Compensation when holding more than one appointment. Contact DHR , Data  Center (813 -974-2970) 
for additiona l information.  
Temporary Employees  – An hourly Temporary employee is eligible for overtime pay for all hours 
actually worked over 40 in a workweek.  
Non-Exempt Employees  – When an applicable employee ’s work week cannot be adjusted to 
prevent an overtime s ituation, he/she is to be compensated for all hours of work as determined by the 
applicable collective bargaining agreement (CBA) as follows:  
 AFSCME Collective Bargaining Agreement  
 PBA Collective Bargaining Agreement  
 UFF/GAU Collective Bargaining Agreemen t  
If permitted by the collective bargaining contract/agreement, each Vice President/Provost may 
authorize the earning of overtime compensatory leave in lieu of receipt of payment for overtime 
worked. This authority may be further delegated to organization al unit heads.  
An employee ’s supervisor or other appropriate authority and the employee should discuss and agree 
upon the method by which the employee will be compensated prior to overtime being worked. All 
hours of work are to be reflected on the timeshe et.  
Exempt Staff Employees – When an exempt Staff employee ’s workweek cannot be adjusted to 
prevent an overtime situation, he/she is eligible to earn regular compensatory leave in an amount 
equivalent to the actual time worked in excess of 40 hours in the  workweek, with a maximum accrual 
of 120 hours.  
All hours of work are to be reflected on the timesheet. Refer also to the following sample equation for 
calculating regular compensatory leave:  
Example  – actual h ours worked in workweek: 44 h ours  
40 hours o f pay at the regular hourly rate of pay   
Division of Human Resources / Attendance and Leave                                        Return to Table of Contents                   Page  | 9                                                                                          
Form questions:  (813) 974 -2970  Rev. 11/2018  Employee earns 4 hours of regular compensatory (hour for hour) leave  to be taken off at a 
later date, but as soon as possible.  
When an employee has accrued 120 hours of regular compensatory leave and is required to work 
additional hours over 40 due to an extraordinary work situation, the Vice President (who may 
delegate to the Dean/Director) may authorize payment for the regular compensatory leave earned in 
excess of 120.  
Supervisors are encouraged to prohibit overt ime work until the leave balance can be reduced.  
USE , TRANSFER AND PAYMENT  OF COMPENSATORY LEAVE  (STAFF EMPLOYEES  ONLY)  
Use of Compensatory Leave  – Upon a Staff employee ’s request and supervisor ’s approval, the  
employee may use earned compensatory leave to  cover absence from work for any reason. A 
supervisor may require an employee to use part or all of his/her accrued compensatory leave before 
using annual or sick leave. With the exception of law enforcement officers, a supervisor may also 
require a Staff employee who has earned any type of compensatory leave to first use such leave 
before using accrued leave.  
Refer also to Article 15.3 Special Compensatory Leave of PBA Collective Bargaining Agreement.  
Transfer of Compensatory Leave  
Overtime Compensatory Leave  – When an employee is appointed to another position within the 
same organizational unit (college/division), unused overtime compensatory leave may be retained by 
the employee, except when he/she is appointed to a position in an exempt class after occ upying a 
position in a non -exempt class. In such case, the employee is paid for all unused leave of this type.  
Special Compensatory Leave  – When an employee is appointed to another position within the 
same organizational unit (college/division), unused sp ecial compensatory leave may be retained by 
the employee, except when he/she is appointed to a position in a Faculty or Administration class. In 
such case, the employee is paid for all unused leave of this type.  
Regular Compensatory Leave  – All unused reg ular compensatory leave is forfeited in situations 
where such leave cannot be transferred or when an employee separates from the university, 
including for employment with another university in the State University System.  
1) When a Staff employee eligible to  earn regular compensatory leave is appointed to 
another position in an exempt Staff class, or to a position in a non -exempt Staff class, any 
such unused leave is retained by the employee.  
 
2) When a Staff employee eligible to earn regular compensatory leave  is appointed to a 
position in a Faculty or Administration class, or is appointed Temporary, any such unused 
leave is forfeited.  
 
3) When the FLSA designation of a class changes from exempt to non -exempt or when the 
position to which an employee is assigned i s reclassified from an exempt Staff to a non -
exempt Staff class, such employee may retain any unused regular compensatory leave 
for future use. However, the employee is no longer eligible to earn additional leave of this 
type. If the position is reclassifi ed to a Faculty or Administration class, all regular 
compensatory leave is forfeited.   
Division of Human Resources / Attendance and Leave                                        Return to Table of Contents                   Page  | 10                                                                                          
Form questions:  (813) 974 -2970  Rev. 11/2018  
CALCULATING OVERTIME  COMPENSATION  
The FLSA governs the calculation of hours, rates of pay and the payment 
of overtime compensation for covered employees.  
An employee e ligible to receive overtime payment will be paid the 
equivalent of 1.5 times his/her regular hourly rate of pay for actual time 
worked in excess of 40 hours in the workweek. When payment for 
overtime work is required, the employee ’s department must certify  the actual hours worked in Payroll 
Certs in the overtime field. GEMS will automatically calculate overtime hours at 1.5 times the regular 
hourly rate. An employee working in two separa te, non -exempt jobs (e.g., Staff and Temporary 
hourly) in which the act ual time worked is in excess of 40 hours for both jobs in the workweek, 
overtime will normally be paid by the secondary (Temporary) employer.  
Holiday hours and any leave hours used in a week do not count as time worked when determining if 
overtime is appl icable. A non -exempt employee must actually work over 40 hours in a week in 
addition to any holiday hours or leave time used to be eligible for overtime.  
An example  of how overtime pay is calculated is shown below.  
Example (Over 40 hours worked in workwe ek): 
Regular hourly rate of pay: $10.00  
Actual hours worked in a workweek = 47  
40 hours X $10.00 per hour = $400 for a regular workweek  
$10.00 x 1.5 = $15.00 overtime hourly rate  
$15.00 x 7 hours worked in excess of 40 = $105.00 overtime pay  
Calculati ng Overtime for Two or More Different Jobs (All Nonexempt)  
When an employee has two or more non -exempt jobs at the university the employee is eligible for 
payment of overtime if the total hours worked among all jobs exceeds 40 hours in a workweek . 
Generall y, the hours in excess of 40 are performed in secondary jobs . Therefore , the secondary 
employer is usually the one responsible for payment of overtime.  
To compute the overtime rate for two different jobs, University Payroll determines the weighted 
average  hourly rate per the  FLSA . This calculation is done manually and separately for each week of 
the pay period.  All hours for all jobs worked in each week are factored into the calculation.  Any leave 
hours used by the employee and any holidays occurring du ring the week are factored into the 
calculation as paid but non -worked time.  As noted above, no overtime will be paid unless the 
employee actually worked more than 40 hours total during the week.  Payroll will apply the proper 
overtime rate to the appropr iate number of overtime hours to be paid in each week.   
PARTICIPATION ON COM MITTEES, TASK FORCES , AND ELECTED BODIES  
Encouragement to Serve  - USF recognizes the need and desire of Staff and Administration 
employees with permanent status to participate as e lected officers of the Staff Senate or 
Administrative Advisory Council, and to encourage participation in  university -wide standing councils 
and committees, search committees, grievance committees, task forces, teams, workgroups, and the 
like. 